# graph-editor
Force-Directed Graph Editor

This web application is a graph editor that uses the [force-graph library](https://github.com/vasturiano/force-graph/) with the [d3-force simulation library](https://d3js.org/d3-force). Much of the code was written with help from [Cursor](https://www.cursor.com/).

The application has a canvas (drawing surface) that displays graphs that have nodes and links (undirected edges). While the force-graph and D3 libraries support large graphs, this application is intended to be used with relatively small graphs that are edited by humans.

The application also has a sidebar with four tools. The Node tool is used to create and to modify graph nodes. The link tool is used to create links between pairs of nodes. The color tool is used to specify the color of both links and nodes. The Graph tool is used for graph-wide operations (automatic layout, clear, save, and load).

When the application starts, it loads an example graph onto the canvas. (Hit the Clear button in the Graph tool if you want to start with a blank canvas.) This example demonstrates a generic life map, similar to the ones described in the Harvard Business Review Article [Retiring Without Regrets](https://hbr.org/2024/11/retire-without-regrets) and the book [Retiring: Creating a Life That Works for You](https://www.routledge.com/Retiring-Creating-a-Life-That-Works-for-You/Amabile-Bailyn-Crary-Hall-Kram/p/book/9781032451503) ([Amazon](https://www.amazon.com/Retiring-Creating-Life-That-Works/dp/1032451505)). The life map use case motivated the development of this graph editor, but there are many other use cases for graphs as a data structure. The circles on the graph (called "nodes") represent people, places, things, concepts, and other entities. The lines on the graph (called "links") represent relationships between the nodes.

If you want to experiment with the example, try hitting the Layout button in the Graph tool. The graph editor will use the d3-force library to move the nodes into an arrangement that should help with visualization. Nodes of the same color move closer to one another, especially if the links between the nodes are also the same color. Stronger links will keep nodes closer; weaker links will let nodes drift apart. Click on nodes and drag them to explore the graph. When you release a node that you have dragged, it will stick to the canvas behind the graph. If you right-click on a node, it will no longer stick in one place. Hitting the Layout button is like right-clicking every node simultaneously. You can also move the whole graph by clicking on the canvas, or zoom in an out using a "pinching" motion on a trackpad or touchscreen (which should be a familiar gesture from other apps).

You can change each node by clicking on it. After you click on a node, you can use the Node tool in the sidebar to change the label or size. You change the color of a selected node using the Color tool. Try it out... Click on a node to select it, and then click one of the eight circles in the Color tool. If none of the palette colors suit your fancy, you can use the rectangle to select any color in the digital rainbow. You can also change links by clicking on them. Use the Link tool to change the strength of a link, and the Color tool to change the color.

If you selected more than one node, you may have noticed that new links are created by clicking on one node and then on another node. If you want to select nodes without creating links, click on the Add Links toggle switch on the Links tool to disable this function. When you're ready to start creating links again, click on the Add Links toggle switch again to turn it back on. After you create a link, the link will be selected to make it easier to change the strength or the color of the link. If you want to create a bunch of links from a single node, press the control key as you select the nodes to be linked. Pressing the control key keeps the selection on the same node. If you want to create a number of links in a sequence (A -> B -> C -> D), press the shift key as you select the nodes to be linked. Pressing the shift key selects each newly-linked node.

To create new nodes, hit the Add button on the Node tool. The graph editor will place a new node with the selected label, size, and color in a random place on the canvas. If you want to specify the location of the new node, position the mouse cursor on the canvas and hit the 'N' key on your keyboard. You might need to click on the canvas to ensure that the 'N' keystroke goes to the canvas rather than some other control in the app or on your web browser.

You can also delete selected nodes or links by hitting the corresponding Delete button in the Node tool or the Link tool. The Backspace and Delete keys will also delete the selected node or link.

To save a graph to your local disk, hit the Save button. You can specify a name for the saved graph by entering it into the box in the Graph tool. Once you have saved a graph, you can retrieve it with the Load button in the Graph tool. You can also clear the canvas using the Clear button. When using the Load or Clear buttons, the graph editor will remind you if you have any unsaved edits.

If you ever want to return to the original example, you can restart the application by hitting your web browser's Reload button or menu item. Be careful! The helpful reminders about unsaved edits won't work if you use the Reload button on your web browser. Using "Reload" is kind of like rebooting the application: all of your changes will be lost.

The help button in the upper right corner of the canvas loads this documentation page in a separate tab of your browser. If you have any feedback on this application, please consider opening a new issue [here](https://github.com/davidchaiken/graph-editor/issues) in the source code repository on GitHub.